CASE 3: CYBERSECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN SYSTEMS ENGINEERING—THE STUXNET ATTACK ON A CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEM


Background As our world becomes increasingly digital, the issue of cybersecurity is a factor that the SE practitioner needs to consider. Both hardware and software systems are increasingly at risk for disruption or damage caused by threats taking advantage of digital technologies. Stuxnet, a cyber-attack on Iran’s nuclear capabilities discovered in 2010, illustrates the need for the SE practitioner to be comprehensive in application of secure design principles and methods for assessing and avoiding vulnerabilities, and rigorous in mitigation of attack potential (Failliere, 2011; Langner, 2012).

This case study discusses a high degree of attack sophistication previously unseen—malware complexity at military-grade performance, nearly no side effects, and pinpoint accuracy. However, though the creation and deployment of Stuxnet were expensive undertakings, the strategy, tactical methods, and code mechanisms became openly available for others to reuse and build upon at much less expense. Cyber-physical system attacks are becoming increasingly prevalent, and SE must consider the implications of cybersecurity to reduce the vulnerabilities.

Iran’s Natanz nuclear fuel enrichment plant (FEP) is a military-hardened facility, with a security fence surrounding a complex of buildings, which are in turn each protected by a series of concrete walls. The complex contains several “cascade halls” for the production of enriched uranium in gas centrifuges. This facility was further hardened with a roof of several meters of reinforced concrete and covered with a thick layer of earth.

Each of the cascade halls is a cyber-physical system, with an industrial control system (ICS) of programmable logic controllers (PLCs), computers, an internal network with no connections to the outside world, and capacity for thousands of centrifuges. Though the internal network is isolated from the outside world by an “air gap,” possible vulnerabilities still include malicious insider collusion, non-malicious insider insertion of memory devices brought in from the outside, visiting service technicians, and supply chain intervention. It has been suggested that all of these breech vectors may have played a role in the massive centrifuge damage that began occurring in 2009 and continued at least through 2010.

Malware, now known as Stuxnet, was introduced into the ICS of at least one of the cascade halls and managed to take surreptitious control of the centrifuges, causing them to spin periodically and repeatedly at rates damaging to sustained physical operation. The net effect of the attack is still unclear, but at a minimum, it ranged from disruption of the production process up to potential permanent damage to the affected centrifuges.

Approach Many characteristics of Stuxnet were unprecedented and stand as the inflection point that ushered in a new era of system attack methodology and cyber-physical system targeting. Illuminating forensic analysis of the Stuxnet code was conducted by several well-known cybersecurity firms, with detailed postmortems covered in two documents from the Institute for Science and International Security (Albright, et al., 2010, 2011). This analysis is beneficial in expanding the risk landscape that the SE practitioner should consider during design. Below are some concepts that are concerned in the context of Stuxnet:

Knowing what to do (intelligence)—To be successful, a threat has to be able to take advantage of the targeted system(s). It is uncertain how the perpetrators knew what specific devices were employed in what configuration at Natanz; but after the Stuxnet code was analyzed, Natanz was clearly identified as the target. Stuxnet infected many sites other than Natanz, but it would only activate if that site was configured to certain specific system specifications. The perpetrators needed specific system configuration information to know how to cause damage and also to know how to single out the target among many similar but not identical facilities elsewhere. The SE practitioner needs to consider that adversaries will attempt to gain intelligence on a system and must consider methods to prevent this.

Crafting the code—A zero-day attack is one that exploits a previously unknown vulnerability in a computer application, one that developers have had no time to address and patch. Stuxnet attacked Windows systems outside the FEP using a variety of zero‐day exploits and stolen certificates to get proper insertion into the operating system and then initiated a multistage propagation mechanism that started with Universal Serial Bus (USB) removable media infected outside the FEP and ended with code insertion into the ICS inside the FEP. SE practitioners need to be prepared for many different attack vectors (including internal threats) and must consider them during system design.

Jumping the air gap—It was widely believed that Stuxnet crossed the air gap on a USB removable media device, which had been originally infected on a computer outside of the FEP and carried inside. But it was also suggested that the supply chain for PLCs and PLC maintenance personnel may have been at least two additional attack vectors. Whatever the methods, the air gap was crossed multiple times. USB removable media could have also affected a bidirectional transfer of information, sending out detailed intelligence about device types connected to the FEP network subsequently relayed to remote servers outside of the control of the facility. The SE practitioner always needs to remember that threats to the system are both inside and outside the system boundary.

Dynamic updating—Analysis shows that the attack code, once inserted, could be updated and changed over time, perhaps to take advantage of new knowledge or to implement new objectives. Stuxnet appears to have been continuously updated, with new operational parameters reintroduced as new air gap crossings occur. The SE practitioner needs to prepare for situations after a successful attack has occurred.



Conclusions As the complexity and technology of systems change, the SE practitioner’s perspective needs to adjust accordingly. The increasing use of digital-based technologies in system design offers enormous benefits to everyone. However, the introduction of digital technologies also brings different risks than previously dealt with by SE. The case study earlier illustrates a point in time behind us, and the adversarial community continues to evolve new methods. The lesson of this case study is that the SE practitioner needs to understand the threats toward their system(s), be cognizant that attacks can and will occur, and be proactive in protecting their system(s). Robust and dynamic system security needs full engagement of SE (see Section 3.1.12). A database that the SE practitioners should be aware of is maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, 2012).