CASE 1: RADIATION THERAPY—THE THERAC-25


Background Therac-25, a dual-mode medical linear accelerator (LINAC), was developed by the medical division of the Atomic Energy Commission Limited (AECL) of Canada, starting in 1976. A completely computerized system became commercially available in 1982. This new machine could be built at lower production cost, resulting in lower prices for the customers. However, a series of tragic accidents led to the recommended recall and discontinuation of the system.

The Therac-25 was a medical LINAC, or particle accelerator, capable of increasing the energy of electrically charged atomic particles. LINACs accelerate charged particles by introducing an electric field to produce particle beams (i.e., radiation), which are then focused by magnets. Medical LINACs are used to treat cancer patients by exposing malignant cells to radiation. Since malignant tissues are more sensitive than normal tissues to radiation exposure, a treatment plan can be developed that permits the absorption of an amount of radiation that is fatal to tumors but causes relatively minor damage to surrounding tissue.

Six accidents involving enormous radiation overdoses to patients took place between 1985 and 1987. Tragically, three of these accidents resulted in the death of the patients. This case is ranked in the top ten worst software-related incidents on many lists. Details of the accidents and analysis of the case are available from many sources, including Jacky (1989) and Leveson and Turner (1993).

Approach Therac-25 was a revolutionary design compared to its predecessors, Therac-6 and Therac-20, both with exceptional safety records. It was based on a double-pass concept that allowed a more powerful accelerator to be built into a compact and versatile machine. AECL designed Therac-25 to fully utilize the potential of software control. While Therac-6 and Therac-20 were built as stand-alone machines and could be operated without a computer, Therac-25 depended on a tight integration of software and hardware. In the new, tightly coupled system, AECL used software to monitor the state of the machine and to ensure its proper operations and safety. Previous versions had included independent circuits to monitor the status of the beam as well as hardware interlocks that prevented the machine from delivering radiation doses that were too high or from performing any unsafe operation that could potentially harm the patient. In Therac-25, AECL decided not to duplicate these hardware interlocks since the software already performed status checks and handled all the malfunctions. This meant that the Therac-25 software had far more responsibility for safety than the software in the previous models. If, in the course of treatment, the software detected a minor malfunction, it would pause the treatment. In this case, the procedure could be restarted by pressing a single “proceed” key. Only if a serious malfunction was detected was it required to completely reset the treatment parameters to restart the machine.

The software for Therac-25 was developed from the Therac-20’s software, which was developed from the Therac-6’s software, a brownfield, or legacy, development (see Section 4.3.2). One programmer, over several years, evolved the Therac-6 software into the Therac-25 software. A stand-alone, real-time operating system was added along with application software written in assembly language and tested as a part of the Therac-25 system operation. In addition, significant adjustments had been made to simplify the operator interface and minimize data entry, since initial operators complained that it took too long to enter a treatment plan.

At the time of its introduction to market in 1982, Therac-25 was classified as a Class II medical device. Since the Therac-25 software was based on software used in the earlier Therac-20 and Therac-6 models, Therac-25 was approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration under Premarket Equivalency.

Conclusions The errors were introduced in the concept and early development stages, when the decisions were made to create the software for Therac-25 using the modification of existing software from the two prior machines. The consequences of these actions were difficult to assess at the time, because the starting point (software from Therac-6) was a poorly documented product and no one except the original software developer could follow the logic (Leveson and Turner, 1993).

The issues from the Therac case are, unfortunately, still relevant, as evidenced by similar deaths for similar reasons in 2007 upon the introduction of new LINAC-based radiation therapy machines (Bogdanich, 2010).