National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NASA insignia Background photo showing a flow chart and data concept

# NASA

# SYSTEMS ENGINEERING

# HANDBOOK

Researchers at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Va., use all sorts of tools and techniques to learn more during the development of aircraft and spacecraft designs. In this photo, engineers led by researcher Greg Gatlin have sprayed fluorescent oil on a 5.8 percent scale model of a futuristic hybrid wing body during tests in the14 by-22-Foot Subsonic Wind Tunnel. The oil helps researchers "see" the flow patterns when air passes over and around the model. Those patterns are important in determining crucial aircraft characteristics such as lift and drag. Credits: NASA Langley/Preston Martin Orion Water Test Drop on 08/24/16. NASA Langley Research Center Scientists and engineers placed two NASA James Webb Space Telescope test primary mirror segments onto the support structure that will hold them, where they resemble stepping stones, as seen in this photo. Photo credit: NASA/Chris Gunn Self-portrait of NASA’s Curiosity Mars rover shows the vehicle at the “Mojave” site, where its drill collected the mission’s second taste of Mount Sharp

www.nasa.gov

NASA SP-2016-6105 Rev2 supersedes SP-2007-6105 Rev 1 dated December, 2007.

**Cover photos: Top left: In this photo, engineers led by researcher Greg Gatlin have sprayed fluorescent oil on a 5.8 percent scale model of a futuristic hybrid wing body during tests in the 14- by 22-Foot Subsonic Wind Tunnel at NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, VA. The oil helps researchers “see” the flow patterns when air passes over and around the model. (NASA Langley/Preston Martin) Top right: Water impact test of a test version of the Orion spacecraft took place on August 24, 2016, at NASA Langley Research Center (NASA) Bottom left: two test mirror segments are placed onto the support structure that will hold them. (NASA/Chris Gunn) Bottom right: This self-portrait of NASA’s Curiosity Mars rover shows the vehicle at the “Mojave” site, where its drill collected the mission’s second taste of Mount Sharp. (NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS)**

**Comments, questions, and suggestions regarding this document can be sent to:**

**Steven R. Hirshorn**

Chief Engineer, Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD)

Office of the Chief Engineer

NASA Headquarters, Room 6D37

300 E St SW

Washington, DC 20546-0001

202-358-0775

*steven.r.hirshorn@nasa.gov*

# Table of Contents

*Preface viii*

*Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . .ix*

**1.0**

Introduction 1

1.1

1.2

**2.0**

Fundamentals of Systems Engineering 3

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

**3.0**

NASA Program/Project Life Cycle 17

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

3.10

3.11

3.11.1

3.11.2

3.11.3

3.11.4

3.11.5

3.11.6

**4.0**

System Design Processes 43

4.1

4.1.1

4.1.2

4.2

4.2.1

4.2.2

4.3

4.3.1

4.3.2

4.4

4.4.1

4.4.2

**5.0**

Product Realization 77

5.1

5.1.1

5.1.2

5.2

5.2.1

5.2.2

5.3

5.3.1 5.3.2 5.4 5.4.1 5.4.2 5.5 5.5.1 5.5.2
