## Competency Area

Competency Description SE 1.0 SE 1.1 Eliciting and defining use cases, scenarios, concept of operations and stakeholder expectations. This includes identifying stakeholders, establishing support strategies, establishing a set of Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs), validating stakeholder expectation statements, and obtaining commitments from the customer and other stakeholders, as well as using the baselined stakeholder expectations for product validation during product realization SE 1.2 Transforming the baseline stakeholder expectations into unique, quantitative, and measurable technical requirements expressed as “shall” statements that can be used for defining the design solution. This includes analyzing the scope of the technical problems to be solved, defining constraints affecting the designs, defining the performance requirements, validating the resulting technical requirement statements, defining the Measures of Performance (MOPs) for each MOE, and defining appropriate Technical Performance Measures (TPMs) by which technical progress will be assessed.

SE 1.3 Transforming the defined set of technical requirements into a set of logical decomposition models and their associated set of derived technical requirements for lower levels of the system, and for input to the design solution efforts. This includes decomposing and analyzing by function, time, behavior, data flow, object, and other models. It also includes allocating requirements to these decomposition models, resolving conflicts between derived requirements as revealed by the models, defining a system architecture for establishing the levels of allocation, and validating the derived technical requirements.

SE 1.4 Translating the decomposition models and derived requirements into one or more design solutions, and using the Decision Analysis process to analyze each alternative and for selecting a preferred alternative that will satisfy the technical requirements. A full technical data package is developed describing the selected solution. This includes generating a full design description for the selected solution; developing a set of ‘make-to,’ ‘buy-to,’ ‘reuse-to,’ specifications; and initiating the development or acquisition of system products and enabling products.

SE 2.0 SE 2.1 Generating a specific product through buying, making, or reusing so as to satisfy the design requirements. This includes preparing the implementation strategy; building or coding the produce; reviewing vendor technical information; inspecting delivered, built, or reused products; and preparing product support documentation for integration.

SE 2.2 Assembling and integrating lower-level validated end products into the desired end product of the higher-level product. This includes preparing the product integration strategy, performing detailed planning, obtaining products to integrate, confirming that the products are ready for integration, preparing the integration environment, and preparing product support documentation.

SE 2.3 Proving the end product conforms to its requirements. This includes preparing for the verification efforts, analyzing the outcomes of verification (including identifying anomalies and establishing recommended corrective actions), and preparing a product verification report providing the evidence of product conformance with the applicable requirements.
