## 4.0

# System Design Processes

T

FIGURE 2.1-1





FIGURE 2.1-1





FIGURE 4.0-1





















Once the system meets the stakeholder expectations, the study team baselines the products and prepares for the next phase. Often, intermediate levels of decomposition are validated as part of the process. In

Iterate RequirementsProgram AuthorityNeeds, Goals and ObjectivesConstraintsSuccess CriteriaDevelop ConOpsStakeholder ExpectationsIterate ConOpsIterate ExpectationsDesign Solution DefinitionDerived and Allocated Requirements• Functional• Performance•Interface•Operational• Safety• “ilities”ValidateReq. SetReq. Meet ConOps?Inconsistencies - IterateGood YesRequirements DefinitionNo - IterateCompare EvaluateSuccess CriteriaIterateLowest Level?No – Recursive CycleTo Product Realization ProcessesLogical DecompositionDecomposition• Functional Flow• Temporal Flow• Behavioral• Data Flow• States and ModesDevelop ArchitectureDevelop DesignConOps

FIGURE 4.0‑1 Interrelationships among the System Design Processes

SYSTEM DESIGN KEYS

• Successfully understanding and defining the mission objectives and the concept of operations are keys to capturing the stakeholder expectations, which will translate into quality requirements and operational efficiencies over the life cycle of the project.

• Complete and thorough requirements traceability is a critical factor in successful validation of requirements.

• Clear and unambiguous requirements will help avoid misunderstanding when developing the overall system and when making major or minor changes.

• Document all decisions made during the development of the original design concept in the technical data package. This will make the original design philosophy and negotiation results available to assess future proposed changes and modifications against.

• The validation of a design solution is a continuing recursive and iterative process during which the design solution is evaluated against stakeholder expectations.








