## Preface

The Graduate Reference Curriculum for Systems Engineering (GRCSE™) is a product of the Bodyof *Knowledge and Curriculum to Advance Systems Engineering (BKCASE™) project. The original* BKCASE project was led by Stevens Institute of Technology and the Naval Postgraduate School. This project created two products: GRCSE and the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015). SEBoK is a guide that provides an overview of keysystem s engineering (SE) knowledge areas and topics, and directs users to references from the SE literature. Version 1.0 of SEBoK was released in Septem ber 2012 and a num ber of updateshave been m ade since. See www.SEBoKwiki.org for details of the latest version. GRCSE m akesignificant use of SEBoK as a reference for the SE content element of its curriculumrecomm endations. GRCSE Version 1.0 was released in Decem ber 2012. It was produced by the original BKCASE™author team , with comm ents and contributions from across the System s Engineering Com m unity. The participation of professional societies in the creation of GRCSE was essentialto ensure that it has the desired im pact on global graduate education. The International Councilon Systems Engineering (INCOSE), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Com puter Society (IEEE CS), the IEEE System s Council, the Institute of Industrial Engineers (IIE) and the National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) System s Engineering Division providedrepresentatives to serve as authors for the BKCASE project. The Association for Com puting M achinery (ACM ) provided review comm ents. At the beginning of 2013, BKCASE transitioned to a new governance m odel with sharedstewardship between the System s Engineering Research Center (SERC), the International Councilon System s Engineering (INCOSE), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Com puter Society (IEEE-CS). This governance structure was form alized in a mem orandum ofunderstanding between the three stewards that was finalized in spring of 2013. The stewardsconfirm ed their commitm ent to m aking the SEBoK and GRCSE available at no cost to all users, a key principle of BKCASE. The two BKCASE products are now m anaged by a BKCASE Editorial Board m ade up of volunteereditors and overseen by an appointed Editor-in-Chief. Please see www.bkcase.org for m oreinform ation. GRCSE Version 1.1 is a minor update produced by the BKCASE Editorial Board. A m oresignificant review and update of GRCSE is planned for 2016.

iii
