## GRCSE 1.0 Acknowledgm ents

The original BKCASE author team was led by Stevens Institute of Technology and the Naval Postgraduate School and com posed of invited experts from industry, governm ent, academia, and various professionalassociations. These authors followed an iterative, evolutionary approach when creating the two prim ary BKCASE products. The author team m et in workshops approximately every three m onths from Decem ber 2009 to October 2012. GRCSE v0.25 was released in Decem ber 2010 to selected mem bers ofthe system s engineering comm unity with the invitation to review and provide the necessary feedback todevelop subsequent versions. This feedback was received and the following year form ed the basis of v0.5, which was released on a public website in Decem ber 2011, inviting review from anyone in thecom m unity. Version 1.0 is the result of further revision of 0.5; it is based on the review comm entsreceived from the comm unity and further review and input the entire BKCASE author team. Each BKCASE author, shown in Table 1 below, supported the writing of the SEBoK Version 1.0, GRCSE Version 1.0, or both. The 20 authors from 17 organizations who specifically supported GRCSE are shownin bold in Table 1. They cam e together selflessly and with the support of their organizations to im proveglobal system s engineering education. GRCSE Version 1.0 was edited by Art Pyster, David H. Olwell, Tim othy L.J. Ferris, Nicole Hutchison, Stephanie Enck, Jam es F. Anthony, Jr., Devanandham Henry, and Alice Squires. Specialacknowledgem ent goes to Tim Ferris, the lead GRCSE author. W ithout his leadership and efforts, thisdocum ent would not have been com pleted. W e gratefully acknowledge the strong support of the U.S. Departm ent of Defense (DoD), which providedfinancial support for this project through the System s Engineering Research Center (SERC) as well asproviding key m em bers of the author team. W e also acknowledge the support of our collaboratingorganizations, including the International Council on System s Engineering (INCOSE), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Com puter Society, the IEEE System s Council, the National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) Systems Engineering Division, the Institute for Industrial Engineers (IIE) and the Association for Com puting M achinery (ACM ). W e especially thank the SERC, which hasprovided administrative and logistical support. The team would also like to thank the technical editors, Abraham Raher, Justin Gercken, and Em ily Leach,for their efforts that im proved the readability and quality of GRCSE.
