## Engineering M aintainability

Hum an System Integration * * Safety Engineering * * Security Engineering * * System Assurance * * Electrom agnetic Interference/Electrom agnetic * * Com patibility Resilience Engineering * * Knowledge M anufacturability and Producibility * * Affordability * * Environm ental Engineering * * *GRCSE recom m ends that program s choose one or m ore Specialty Engineering KAs and teach them at the Application level or higher. These KAs m ay represent a special focus of a program or individual student interest. This level m ay be achieved in the apportionm ent of the curriculum that extends beyond the 50% devoted to the CorBoK and m ay support the SPECIALTY outcom e.

Som e general observations about the recomm endations:

 M ost topics are to be covered at the Knowledge or Com prehension level. This is typicallyachieved through readings and lectures with sim ple exercises. Substantial instructionalactivities m ay not be needed to achieve these levels.

 There are 20 topics at the Application level in the Foundation and 3 topics at the Analysis level.

To achieve these levels, student activities related to problem solving and inquiry will have tobe included in the curriculum .

 SEM elevates 11 topics from the Com prehension level to the Application level and elevates 11 to the Analysis level; hence, SEM requires 26 topics be covered at the Application level and 11 at the Analysis level.

 SDD elevates 11 topics from the Com prehension level up to the Application level and elevates 10 topics from the Application level to the Analysis level; subsequently, SDD requires 31 topicsto be covered at the Application level and 13 at the Analysis level.

 The SEBoK includes recom m ended prim ary and additional readings for every topic. Theserecom m endations are natural sources for textbooks and papers to be used in courses thatcover the CorBoK topics.

- **6.3 Recom m ended Distribution of CorBoK 50%**

Based on the survey of graduate program s conducted at the beginning of the BKCASE project (see Appendix B), the SE program s requires the equivalent of ten to twelve 3-unit semester courses, whichexpands to approximately 450 to 500 contact hours between students and faculty in whatever form atthe courses are delivered. For purposes of planning curriculum content, GRCSE estim ates 480 hours asthe total num ber of contact hours needed for a SE m aster’s program. Consequently, using the 50% guideline, CorBoK instruction is presum ed to take approximately 240 contact hours, includingexaminations and non-instructional tim e spent with students. Clearly, this will vary from program toprogram , but the general guidance of 240 contact hours for coverage of CorBoK topics provides a keyguidance elem ent in GRCSE curriculum design. There is the question: How should these 240 contact hours be distributed across the curriculum ? That is,how should the hours be allocated to the various Parts, KAs, and Topics? Considering the variation in the Bloom levels specified for topics in Parts 2-6, it is clear that Part 3 will require m ore instruction tim e thando Parts 2, 4, 5, and 6. The GRCSE authors engaged in m uch analysis and discussion about what guidanceshould be provided on how the 240 hours should be distributed across the CorBoK topics. Although noconclusion on precise guidance was reached, the GRCSE authors recom mend that the CorBoK’s 50% content be allocated as follows: approxim ately 30 % of the tim e should be devoted to Part 3 CorBoKtopics and the remaining 20% should be devoted to topics in Parts 2, 4, 5, and 6. See Appendix H for anexam ple of how the 240 hours might be distributed.

- **6.4 Developm ent of the CorBoK**

The Knowledge Areas and Topics in tables 5 through 9 are taken from SEBoK Version 1.4 (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015). The SEBoK is under continual review and updated versions are produced twiceper year. The topic level m appings will rem ain valid as the detailed m aterial evolves to m atch thechanging nature of SE knowledge. Anyone using GRCSE as a curriculum reference will need to trackthese evolutions of SEBoK content and decide how to respond to them . If SEBoK topics are added or renamed, or if content changes affect the CoRBoK knowledge levels, a newversion of GRCSE will be produced to represent these changes. Due to difference in publishing tim elinesthis m ay not be done immediately and GRCSE users need to be aware of the latest SEBoK topics. Eachnew version of the SEBoK includes a detailed description of what has changed. Notification of newversions is provided by the SEBoK Newsletter, which is available via www.BKCASE.org. The GRCSE authors went through several iterations to produce the recomm endations shown in thischapter, collecting inputs from num erous sources and iterating in author workshops. To this end, the GRCSE team , over a series of m eetings determined the Bloom level specifications and estim ated contacttim e needed to cover different CorBoK parts and their KAs. The process was collaborative in nature and the m ethodology involved a quasi-W ideband Delphitechnique. Reviewer feedback has been helpful in evolving the recomm endations into m ore m ature m odel. Anyone wishing to provide additional feedback on the value of the CoRBoK should contact the BKCASE editorial board at www.BKCASE.org.
