## 9. Evolution

GRCSE v. 1.1 incorporates a set of sm all changes to GRCSE v. 1.0. The changes in the fore matter up toand including the Executive Sum m ary m ore correctly present the current arrangem ents for support and m aintenance with respect to the Board of Governors, the sponsoring organizations and the BKCASE Editorial Board. Changes to the m ain text of GRCSE are responses to changes in SEBoK up to v. 1.4 andcorrections of minor textual m atters found since the v. 1.0 release. GRCSE v. 1.0 was the first release offered for world-wide use and adoption. It is aligned with SEBoK v.

1.0, which was released in Septem ber 2012, and is built on GRCSE v. 0.5, which was released for worldwide comm ent in December 2011. The BKCASE project, originally led by the Stevens Institute of Technology and the Naval Postgraduate School, was responsible for the developm ent of both GRCSE andthe SEBoK. The BKCASE products are now under the long-term stewardship of a Board of Governors com posed ofthe International Council on System s Engineering (INCOSE), the IEEE-Com puter Society (IEEE-CS), andthe Systems Engineering Research Council (SERC) for joint prom ulgation, maintenance, and evolution. Both the SEBoK and GRCSE, if they are to have widespread im pact, need the influence and long-termstable resources that only m ajor professional societies can offer. INCOSE (the m ost prominent globalprofessional society dedicated to SE) and the IEEE-CS (the com puting related elem ent of the largest and m ost prominent global professional engineering society) are ideal organizations to be co-stewards of the SEBoK and GRCSE projects. As the third steward, the SERC provides continuity from the developm entphase of both SEBoK and GRCSE and includes m any universities with system s engineering educationalprogram s. INCOSE’s interest in becom ing a co-steward with IEEE-CS has been strong since the project began. The m ajority of the original BKCASE authors were INCOSE m em bers, m any in leadership positions. The INCOSE Board of Directors has repeatedly shown high interest in the BKCASE project. During its initialdevelopment, INCOSE funded three authors to contribute to the writing as well as to represent INCOSE. The Board of Directors has passed m ultiple resolutions expressing INCOSE’s commitm ent to be a steward of both the SEBoK and GRCSE and to authorize the funds necessary for that stewardship to besuccessful. From the beginning of the project, the IEEE also showed strong interest in becoming a steward;however, because the IEEE is m uch larger than INCOSE, they needed to identify the specificorganizational unit to work with SERC and INCOSE. The IEEE-CS is that unit. The leadership of the IEEE-CShad representatives on the original author team contributing to the writing and representing the Society. A com mittee of six people form ed in the sum mer of 2011 to draft a stewardship agreem ent betweenthe Stevens Institute of Technology (representing the SERC), INCOSE, and the IEEE-CS. That agreem entwas signed by all parties in Spring 2013. An am ended version was produced in June 2014; this clarified a few things, but did not fundam entally change the agreem ent or extend the period of the agreement. A new version of the M oU, extending the agreem ent to 2016-2018, will be signed by the end of 2015.

The agreem ent covers how the products are disseminated and supported, the periodicity for minor and m ajor revisions, as well as who can authorize those revision. Additionally, it confirm s that all productrevisions are free for worldwide use. The m ajor points of agreem ent are that to prom ote stability, GRCSE will be infrequently updated. Thecurrent, minor-update, is the first update to GRCSE. The next update is planned for the end of 2016 orearly 2017. In the m eantime, the stewards will collect any com m ents on the BKCASE site using a DISQUScom ment tool. The URL for m aking comm ents is: www.bkcase.org/grcse/.

Editorial control of the SEBoK and GRCSE is now held by an editorial board with an editor-in-chiefappointed by the stewards. One of the prim ary functions of the editorial board is to m anage theevolution of GRCSE. In particular, the editorial board reviews and adjudicates all user feedback, and m anages revisions to ensure that GRCSE increases in value over tim e both to the stewards and to thelarger SE com m unity.
