## B.1 M ethodology

As the Graduate Reference Curriculum for System s Engineering (GRCSE) authors began considering theappropriate recomm endations for outcom es, objectives, and entrance expectations, and theappropriate m aterials to include within the Core Body of Knowledge (CorBoK), they realized that it wasim portant to understand the current landscape of system s engineering (SE) master’s program s. W iththis baseline, they could better understand what recom mendations were appropriate for GRCSE. Forexam ple, recommendations less stringent than what is seen in m any program s today would not benefitthe comm unity, while recomm endations that are far m ore rigorous than anything seen today might beconsidered unattainable. Understanding the baseline of current programs, then, was a critical step in m oving forward with the GRCSE project. In the spring and sum mer of 2010, an international survey was conducted of SE m aster’s degree (M SE)program s. Survey forms were sent to 59 schools, which offered a com bined total of 63 system s-centricsystem s engineering program s. The initial list of candidate U.S. schools and graduate program s wasobtained from work perform ed by Fabrycky (2010). International m em bers of the GRCSE teamaugm ented this list with an additional 26 academic institutions outside the United States. Surveyresponses were received for 33 program s from the following countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Cyprus, Finland, France, Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, and the United States. The range of schools that respondedto the survey included those from traditional universities and specific-purpose institutions (such as thepostgraduate institutions and alliances). It is im portant to note that the survey data was collected oncondition of anonymity; the schools were asked to provide honest responses and in return, the authorteam agreed not to publish the names of the specific institutions responding. It is also im portant to notethat, while SE is often incorporated in some ways into other engineering program s (e.g. m echanical,electrical, m aterial, civil), this survey specifically focused on SE master’s programs. A survey instrum ent, similar to the one shown in Table 17 was developed and adm inistered to collectand organize relevant data concerning the attributes of the program. Although attem pts were m ade tostandardize the way in which the data was provided, there are still som e differences in the level of detailprovided and the interpretation of the instructions by the academic program personnel. This requiredthe team to m ake adjustm ents in the way that the data was analyzed. The analysis can be found in Section B.2, below.
