## C.1 Introduction to Bloom ’s Taxonom y

Bloom ’s taxonom y is a classification system, devised in 1956 by a group of educators led by Benjamin Bloom , for the purpose of providing a scientific foundation for curriculum design (Bloom et al. 1956; Krathwohl, Bloom , and M asia 1964) and was originally developed to categorize test item s for exchangebetween university faculty mem bers (Krathwohl 2002). The intent was to create a bank of test item s that were categorized based on the highest level of what was being tested for each educationalobjective: knowledge, com prehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. Theseeducational objectives becam e the six levels of Bloom ’s taxonomy. The original exposition of thetaxonom y, contained in Bloom et al. (1956) and Krathwohl, Bloom , and M asia (1964) rem ains the bestsource for explaining the taxonom y. Bloom ’s taxonom y has stood the test of time. Over 50 years later, educators continue to use thetaxonom y to set the level of attainm ent of educational or learning outcomes required for studentsengaged in an education unit, course, or program . The taxonom y has become com m only used in m anycountries, at m ultiple levels of education, and in m any fields of teaching (Bloom 1994, 1-8). Because thetaxonom y is known and understood globally to a greater extent than any of its com petitors (Lewy and Bathory 1994), it is appropriate to use Bloom ’s taxonom y in an international docum ent such as GRCSE. Bloom ’s taxonomy is hierarchical; learning at a higher level is dependent on attaining prerequisiteknowledge and skills at the lower levels. This characteristic of Bloom ’s taxonom y reflects itsdevelopment in the framework of behaviorist psychology, which was dominant in the 1950’s. Thebehaviorist links of Bloom ’s taxonom y reflect a tacit philosophy of education based on the developmentof desired behaviors in which the ability to perform an action is accepted as evidence of learning (Furst 1994, 28-40; Rohwer and Sloane 1994, 41-63). W hile Bloom ’s taxonom y has been challenged m orerecently because of the decline in the position of behaviorist psychology, it has rem ained popular am ongeducators in pragm atic fields, such as SE, where the goal of education is to produce graduates who canuse a theoretical foundation to perform work (Kreitzer and M adaus 1994, 64-81). The hierarchical andbehaviorist perspective is suited to an education program , such as a professional m aster’s program , thefocus of GRCSE, where graduates are expected to be able to perform a certain range of tasks with a defined level of com petency. This differs from the m atters of interest in other fields of education. System s engineering is a field of professional practice which is effectively described by the relationshipsof a framework of ideas, with F in Figure 1, describing the knowledge required for practice. Thisfram ework of ideas is applied to particular concerns in the perform ance of SE, which is the area ofconcern and application, represented as A in Figure 7, using the m ethodology M 1. The m ethods, M 1, to

apply the fram ework of ideas of system s engineering are contained within the fram ework of ideas. Goodprofessional practice should involve reflection upon the effect of the work done in a particularapplication of the framework of ideas, in a particular application of SE, which in turn could im prove thefram ework of ideas. This reflective practice is shown by M 2 in Figure 7. In addition, research m ethodswhich are suitable for im proving the fram ework of ideas of SE are available to enable research projects, M 3. Figure 7 also shows the role of education in SE to develop students’ knowledge of the framework ofideas and the methods to perform system s engineering. Education to support both these aspects ofprofessional system s engineering practice is described in GRCSE. Education is also required to enablelearning of how to perform research in system s engineering, which is out of scope of GRCSE.

**Figure 7. The characteristics of system s engineering as a professional field of practice and the place of GRCSE in**
