## supporting education which enables the capabilities required. (GRCSE Original)

Bloom ’s taxonom y divides educational outcomes into three dom ains: cognitive, affective, andpsychom otor. The original 1956 and 1964 work only developed taxonomies for the cognitive andaffective dom ains. In GRCSE, the m ajor focus is on the cognitive domain, which is concerned withknowledge of inform ation and m ethods, the fram ework of ideas of SE, and how it is learned (Huitt

2006). GRCSE also has a minor focus on the affective domain, which is concerned with feelings,appreciation, and valuation of the content that is learned (Schmidt 1975, 36-49). These two dom ains,their hierarchical structure and relative em phasis are shown in Figure 8. Conventional education systems

tend to stress outcomes in the cognitive dom ain. In particular, conventional educators focus on lowerlevel cognitive outcomes and often do not explicitly develop higher-level cognitive outcom es. Additionally, these educators give little attention to affective dom ain engineering outcom es. The CorBoK, as presented in Chapter 6, em phasizes the cognitive dom ain. In addition to showing thehierarchy of levels of achievem ent in the cognitive and affective domains, Figure 8also shows therelationship of the levels of achievement in the cognitive dom ain and the levels of com petency asdescribed in the INCOSE com petency fram ework (INCOSE 2010). In turn this illustrates, com paring thelevel of achievem ent in m ost areas recom mended in the CorBoK and the levels of com petency, that it isreasonable to expect a new graduate in SE to be able to perform work as a supervised practitioner. However, that graduate, by the tim e that they achieve the objectives of their program would beexpected to grow in com petency to be an independent practitioner.

**Figure 8. Visual representation of the hierarchical nature of Bloom ’s taxonom y in the cognitive and affectivedom ains and the relationship of the levels of achievem ent with com petency levels. (GRCSE Original)** However, som e types of education, for exam ple military and theological, m ake the affective dom ain anexplicit focus of their outcom es (see Chapter 3). GRCSE includes consideration of the affective domain inits guiding principles (see A.4.3, Context Guiding Principle #7), and explicitly discusses the relationshipsof the affective dom ain to SE education in this appendix. A key role of the system s engineer is to leadthe developm ent of system s. This role includes working with engineered system s, deliberately taking a system s perspective, and negotiating solutions with m ultiple, diverse stakeholders. These requirem entsof a system s engineer m ake their proficiency in the attributes of the affective dom ain critical to theirsuccess. This is not only obvious in relation to the com petencies associated with teamwork andleadership of projects, but also has a m ore subtle manifestation. The necessity to deliberately take a

system s perspective on the engineering activity demands the developm ent of an affective perspectiveso that the system s engineer naturally chooses to address m atters in the whole system context. Thenegotiation role involves m aking judgm ents about what is good or desirable and also dem ands thatsystem s engineers personally value the system s perspectives required to perform their work.
