## C.2 Bloom ’s Taxonom y Levels in the Cognitive Dom ain

Table 19 provides a description of Bloom’s taxonom y for the cognitive dom ain. The levels of thetaxonom y are comm only referred to as Bloom ’s levels. In a general context, the term “Bloom’s levels”typically refers to the cognitive (as the default) rather than the affective dom ain. There is some debateabout the ordering of the two highest cognitive dom ain levels, “Synthesis” and “Evaluation,” specificallyas to whether their order should be reversed (Krathwohl 2002) or whether they should be com binedinto a single level. This is an area for further research that the GRCSE project does not attem pt toaddress; ergo, in regard to reversing “Synthesis” and “Evaluation,” GRCSE maintains the traditional Bloom ’s taxonom y order rather than the revised Bloom ’s taxonom y order (Krathwohl 2002). Thechallenge to the order of the levels depends on whether the order of the levels in the cognitive dom ainreflect a taxonom y of cognitive levels of attainm ent, but not necessarily of educational outcomes. Thisargum ent is not addressed in GRCSE because the purpose of GRCSE is to provide a reference curriculumfor education specifically designed to lead to the capability of performing successfully in a workplacesetting as well as to reflect the levels of attainm ent that are relevant to the workplace in the logicalorder in which the capabilities are needed (Furst 1994). GRCSE also m aintains the traditional view that “Synthesis” and “Evaluation” are different kinds ofattainment. In relation to engineering work, synthesis is concerned with the application of theknowledge in a m anner that enables the design of either things or processes, and thus enables thesatisfaction of needs. In contrast, evaluation is concerned with the capability that enables m aking goodjudgments about what design is appropriate for a particular application. That is, the action of synthesisis prior to evaluation in engineering work and defines the level of acuity required to perform work. Todem onstrate how these levels m ay be applied specifically to SE, Table 20 shows exam ples of various Bloom cognitive dom ain level com petencies that might apply to GRCSE curricula and courses in the formof possible assignm ents students could com plete. In discussing the hierarchical nature of Bloom ’s taxonom y it is im portant to be thorough and clear indescribing the nature of the levels in the hierarchy. Because Bloom ’s taxonom y is described in a hierarchical m anner, it is possible to misunderstand the levels as sim ply addressing attainm ent in a strictly quantitative sense. However, progression from one level to another is not only the result of m orestudy, but also results from the direction of the study effort to develop a different kind of capability. Forexam ple, progression from “Knowledge” to “Comprehension” is not attained by the sam e type ofstudying that achieved the original knowledge; rather, it is achieved by studying and performing tasksthat redirect the student from activities that are required to develop knowledge to those that arerequired to develop com prehension. Similarly, “Analysis” and “Synthesis” are different kinds of skillsthat involve different approaches to thinking about the subject m atter. A student needs to pass throughthe intellectual developm ent stage of analysis in order to develop the ability to synthesize; synthesis isnot sim ply m ore analysis, but rather a different kind of activity based on a different kind of learning.

The educational goal is to raise the level of attainment of the student to the higher levels of Bloom ’s taxonom y, which will result in the student developing skills that enable that higher level of activity, evenif the m aterial content which the student has expressed at a higher level is of modest m agnitude. Thisdistinction is relevant in SE because the education program m ust develop people who can synthesizeproducts and system s, and at later career stages, can evaluate proposals for system s. The kind ofthought required to synthesize any product or system is similar, although the m agnitude of attainm entrequired increases with the m agnitude and com plexity of the system. Therefore, we m ay conclude thatall system s engineers need the ability to synthesize system s, but that the magnitude of the systemwhich their em ployer trusts them to synthesize will begin sm all and become larger as they dem onstratesuccess.
