## Figure 11. Assessm ent General Process. (GRCSE Original)

**Step 1: Identifying Outcom es and Student Expectations** The objective of step 1 is to identify required outcomes, or what the students are expected to know andperform throughout the course or program using the CorBok. GRCSE, as well as m any instructors, use Bloom's taxonom y (Bloom et al. 1956) to describe levels for learning achievem ents. There are m orerecent works by Gronlund (2000) and Krathwohl (2002) also used as alternatives. Training evaluation m odels, such as the Kirkpatrick m odel (Kirkpatrick 1994), are prim arily used today by industry andconsidered a standard in the training comm unity. This first step should be recursive. A course takes place in a m ore general program and should becom posed of individual lessons. After writing or analyzing course-level learning outcom es, the next stepis to identify outcom es of the individual lessons (or learning m odules) that constitute the course. Thelesson outcom es should clearly point back to and support the achievement of the course objectives; thecourse objectives should clearly point to program objectives; and the program objectives to the overallcollege or university’s general education objectives. Outcom es should be measurable. Indeed, it should be possible to identify one or several perform ancecriteria that correlate with the level of achievem ent of an outcom e. Furtherm ore, this ability isim portant for graduation, as it provides a capacity for determining if a student fulfills all program

outcom es and is prepared to begin his or her career. Perform ance criteria are com pared to the targetsassessed that m ust be achieved for graduation. **Step 2: Define Assessm ent Strategy and M ethods** Step 2 is at the heart of assessm ent because it is where the strategy and tactics of the assessment aredefined. Global objectives of assessm ent strategy should define:

 The outcom es for assessm ent.  How the assessm ent will be com pleted (i.e., by selecting appropriate assessm ent m ethods).  The organization of the assessm ent - identifying task, planning, and resources.  The infrastructure required to perform task assessm ent.

**Step 2.1: Define Assessm ent M ethods** The objective of step 2.1 is to select the outcom e and allocate it to an assessment method. Thisselection is an essential step to ensure the success of the assessm ent process. A good assessm ent m ethod should consist of the following characteristics:

 Validity: Validity refers to determ ining whether the selected assessm ent m ethod isappropriate for m easuring what it is intended to m easure (e.g. content, Bloom ’s level).

 Reliability: Reliability yields consistent responses over tim e. To ensure that the assessedobjective be reproducible –the sam e inputs should provide sam e results.

It is often a tim e-consuming and challenging task to provide evidence supporting the validity of theselected method. According to the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation (Yarbroughet al. 2011), it is necessary to gather evidence to support the interpretation and appropriateness of a survey or test for a specific purpose. For exam ple, pertinence of perform ance criteria, data sourcerepresentation, and the possibility of a student cheating should be carefully studied and the appropriateactions taken (e.g. the use of m ultiple data sources and assessm ent methods). According to W iggins (1993), there is a trade-off between reliability and validity. The com plexity of a task m ay increase validity, but at the sam e tim e, it m ay also decrease reliability due to a lack ofstandardization. The key is to select m ethods that effectively balance the two issues according to theoutcom e level of learning. The assessm ent m ethod should be adequate for the required level of learningassociated with the outcom e. This should also incorporate prioritizing outcom es. The assessment m ethod(s) should be as precise as needed by the priority of the assessed outcom e. This inform ation m ay be displayed in a table indicating which outcomes each assessm ent method will m easure. It is not necessary to assess all of the outcom es at once. An initial focus on those m ostim portant is preferred (i.e., the outcom es for the data that will be m ost useful to the program ). In someinstances, one assessm ent method m ay m easure m ultiple outcom es, and one outcom e m ay be m easured by m ultiple assessm ent m ethods. Table 24 is an inventory of the m ajor or m ost frequently used assessment m ethods, shown as “tools” inthe table (Fulks 2006), including supporting inform ation for selecting the m ethods. These m ethods rely

on feedback from diverse populations (e.g., internships, supervisors, student self-reports, em ployers,and teachers) and are categorized as either direct or indirect in the table. Direct assessment methodsfocus on the com petencies of students in the program and on their knowledge and skills. They are basedon the examination of student testing perform ance, review of student work (e.g., portfolios or theses),or observation of student perform ance within appropriate context. Indirect m ethods differ because theydeal with students’ experiences, opinions, or perceptions. They can be self-reported by the student orobtained by faculty or em ployers. In general, direct measures are strongly preferred during assessment,but m ay be im practical when assessing program objectives. For a system atic presentation and analysisof assessm ent methods, refer to (Prus 1994) or (UCF 2008).

**Table 24. Potential M ethods of Assessm ent (Fulks 2004). Released by Janet Fulks, Assessing Student Learning in**
