## Step 2.2: Define the Life Cycle of Assessm ent

Step 2.2 of the strategy defines when an assessm ent is performed during a course or program. W henperform ed at the beginning or in the middle of the course, the assessm ent provides feedback that isdirectly usable by students and teachers concurrently with course delivery, so results can be form ativeand influential. W hen perform ed at the end of the course, assessm ent measures the final learningachievement for grading purposes and serves as a way to im prove the course. Therefore, a finalassessm ent can be both summ ative and formative. M any program s conduct both mid-course and endof-course assessm ents.

**Step 2.3: Define Infrastructure to Support the Assessm ent Process** Step 2.3 defines the tools and input data that are required to perform the assessm ent. The requiredinfrastructure depends on the assessm ent m ethods selected. For exam ple, when a test is the selectedassessm ent m ethod, the definition of infrastructure would be the specification of data constituting thetest, like a set of test questions. W hen a survey of em ployers is selected, it is im portant to m aintain atleast a set of the em ployers over time. **Step 2.4: Define the Organization for Assessm ent** The objective of Step 2.4 is to perform project m anagement activities related to the assessm ent processby defining tasks, identifying inputs and outputs for each task, identifying planning, and forecasting theworkload necessary to perform the assessment tasks. Organization should also focus on the peopleinvolved in the assessment process by defining the roles, identifying the people to support roles, anddefining the recruitment and training needs. It is im portant to perform assessm ent through diverse stakeholders involved in the program (e.g,students, teachers, em ployers, and former students). This can also take the form of a strategic advisoryboard. External assessors should be educated in system s engineering and should have a clearunderstanding of the university’s approach. Diversity of stakeholders enables the reception of manyviewpoints as well as a high capacity for curriculum evolution and developm ent. **Step 3: Set Up the Infrastructure** Step 3 encom passes the production of the infrastructure according to the specifications developed in Step 2.3, as well as the realization or acquisition of material supporting the assessm ent, such as data andtools. **Step 4: Collect Data** Step 4 is the execution of the assessment specified in Step 2.3 and then realized in Step 3. **Step 5: Analyze Collected Data and Provide Feedback** Collected data may be analyzed according to specific points of view:

 Student sub-populations: In the case of sum m ative assessm ent the data is used to identify a subset of students according to their level of learning achievem ent.

 Student learning: Data from m easures associated with student learning outcom es perm itthe com parison of actual student perform ance with intended student perform ance. It alsoidentifies areas of strength and weakness for students, as well as ways to im prove thelearning program .

 Program and departm ent processes: Data from m easures associated with processesrelated to the departm ent and the program provide inform ation that can im prove theprogram 's functionality and its efforts to facilitate students’ progress toward graduation.

Data quality should be reviewed before it is analyzed to identify confounding factors indicated by thesources and the environm ent at the time of data collection. Identifying these factors can lead to m odifying the assessm ent strategy, such as, changing which data is collected as well as data collection m ethods (see Step 6). The sam ple size influences the validity of assessment findings and should be takeninto account before actions are developed based on analysis results. **Step 6: Im plem ent Changes** The following categories are areas, within the academic environment, where changes m ay beim plem ented:

 Assessm ent Strategy: Changes to assessm ent strategy m ay include a revision ofassessm ent m ethods and their relationship to outcom es, the collection and analysis ofadditional data and inform ation, or changes to the data collection m ethods.

 Program Outcom es: Changes to program outcom es m ay include a revision of intendedlearning outcom e statem ent(s) and their priorities.

 Curriculum : Changes to curriculum m ay include changes in learning m ethods, a revision orenforcem ent of expected student backgrounds, a revision of course sequences, a revisionof course content, and/or the addition or deletion of course(s).

 Academ ic Processes: Changes to academ ic processes m ay include the m odification of thefrequency or scheduling of course offerings, im provem ents in technology, changes inpersonnel, im plem entation of additional training, other im plem ented or planned changes, a revision of advising standards or processes, and/or revision of adm ission requirem ents.

The length of tim e and degree of difficulty of these changes may vary greatly; for exam ple, revisingadmission criteria m ay require approval from m ultiple administrative levels within a university, whilechanges in assessm ent data collection m ethods m ay be under the com plete control of the systemsengineering graduate program faculty. **Step 7: M onitor Changes and Com pare Results** Step 7 m onitors the implem ented changes as part of the continuous im provem ent cycle. Theim plem ented changes are m onitored to determine whether they have achieved the desired effect(s). One way to achieve this is to use the sam e assessment plan as used in the previous cycle and com parethe actual data to the intended data. This approach’s drawback is that the people doing the assessmentwill not necessarily be the sam e. This introduces the possibility of changes induced by observer bias. However, this m ay also be an advantage when the new assessor is not influenced by past observationsor relationships. It m ay also be worthwhile to reach out to the people who performed the form erassessm ent, describe the changes im plem ented, and obtain feedback on the direction of the changes,even though these individuals m ay not have experienced the changes them selves. Additionally, the program environment is evolving, thus driving the program to adapt so that itcontinues to provide its students and comm unity with a suitable education.

Any gaps in an assessm ent strategy should be studied carefully to determine the underlying cause. W here outcomes are m et the best course of action is typically to m aintain m onitoring of them topreserve program quality.
