## Executive Sum m ary

The Graduate Reference Curriculum for Systems Engineering (GRCSE™) is a set of recomm endations forthe developm ent and im plem entation of a systems-centric (Fabrycky 2010) professional m aster’s degreeprogram in systems engineering (SE). It is one of two products of, the Body of Knowledge and Curriculum to Advance System s Engineering (BKCASE™) project. The other product, on which GRCSEdraws, is the Guide to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) (BKCASE Editorial Board,

2015). Despite the im portance of graduate education to meet industry needs for system s engineers, there hasbeen no com m unity-accepted recommendation or guidance on what to teach graduate students about SE. GRCSE offers guidance for system s-centric professional m aster’s degree in SE, including:

 A set of student skills, knowledge, and experience assum ed by the curriculum for the enteringstudent, not intended as entrance requirem ents for a specific program , but as the starting pointfor the curriculum ’s outcom es.

 A set of outcom es identifying the specific com petencies that will be possessed by a student whosuccessfully com pletes a graduate program based on the curriculum.

 A set of objectives aligned with those outcomes and describing the near-term career goals ofsuch a graduate.

 Guidance on curriculum content, including a Core Body of Knowledge (CorBoK).  A conceptual architecture to com m unicate and support im plem entation of the curriculum toachieve the outcom es and objectives.

 Guidance on program im plementation and assessm ent, and how to balance the CoRBoK withthe needs of the national or industrial dom ains being served.

The recomm ended topics provided by GRCSE are drawn from the SEBoK. A core subset of SEBoK topicswas identified, referred to herein as the Core Body of Knowledge (CorBoK). This core consists offoundational topics that should be learned by all SE students, and an initial set of concentrations aimedat students focusing on a specific SE role such as system design and developm ent or system s engineering m anagem ent. GRCSE does not recommend a particular organization of these topics intocourses. W e expect that a program might dedicate up to 50% of the curriculum to core topics; with therest covering select topics in m ore detail and dom ain-specific m aterial that focuses a specific programon a target audience. How this is organized is deferred to the individual educational institution. In addition to identifying specific topics to be covered, GRCSE includes a strong recomm endation that a professional m aster’s program in SE includes som e sort of capstone experience. System s engineering isby nature an intensely practical discipline; therefore, students m ust learn how to integrate theory andpractice. An appropriate capstone experience forces such integration, while offering another dim ensionfor tailoring the reference curriculum to the specific objectives of the university program .

GRCSE is designed for worldwide use. As such, it respects and accom m odates the tremendous diversityin the m arkets that universities serve, the educational system s under which those universities operate,variations in size of student body and faculty, accreditation program s, and other factors that affectprogram content and delivery. Therefore, GRCSE provides a broad set of recomm endations intended toguide universities in building and updating their graduate programs. It is not a standard, nor is itintended to be a foundational docum ent for developing accreditation criteria to be used byaccreditation agencies. GRCSE provides guidance to faculty m em bers at educational institutions whoare designing and updating graduate program s in SE, and to prospective students and their futureem ployers to support the selection of a m aster’s program s in SE that meets their particular needs. Depending on the target m arket served by a particular program, prospective students m ay be midcareer practitioners with undergraduate degrees in SE or other fields of mathem atics, science orengineering who are approaching a m aster’s in SE as a career developm ent step. Alternatively,prospective students m ay be recent graduates with little work experience, which presents a different setof challenges both for them selves and for the educational institution. The structure of GRCSE providessufficient flexibility to accomm odate both use cases, as well as m any others. The original BKCASE author team was led by Stevens Institute of Technology and the Naval Postgraduate School and was com posed of invited experts from industry, government, academia, and variousprofessional associations. These authors followed an iterative, evolutionary approach when creating thetwo prim ary BKCASE products. The BKCASE author team met in workshops approxim ately every three m onths from Decem ber 2009 to October 2012. GRCSE v0.25 was released in Decem ber 2010 to selected m em bers of the systems engineering comm unity with the invitation to review and provide the necessaryfeedback to develop subsequent versions. This feedback was received and the following year formed thebasis of v0.5, which was released on a public website in Decem ber 2011, inviting review from anyone inthe comm unity. Version 1.0 is the result of further revision of v0.5, based on the review com mentsreceived and review work perform ed by the GRCSE author team , followed by review and input from andthe entire BKCASE author team. The participation of professional societies in the creation of GRCSE was essential to ensure that it hasthe desired im pact on global graduate education. The International Council on System s Engineering (INCOSE), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Com puter Society (IEEE CS), the IEEE System s Council, the Institute of Industrial Engineers (IIE) and the National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) Systems Engineering Division provided representatives to serve as authors for the BKCASE project. The Association for Com puting M achinery (ACM ) provided review comments. At the beginning of 2013, BKCASE transitioned to a new governance m odel with shared stewardshipbetween the System s Engineering Research Center (SERC), the International Council on System s Engineering (INCOSE), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Com puter Society (IEEE CS). This governance structure was form alized in a m em orandum of understanding between the threestewards that was finalized in spring of 2013. The stewards have reconfirm ed their commitm ent to m aking the SEBoK available at no cost to all users, a key principle of BKCASE. The two BKCASE products are now m anaged by a BKCASE Editorial Board m ade up of volunteer editorsand overseen by an appointed Editor-in-Chief. Please see www.bkcase.org for more inform ation.
