## (GRCSE Original)

GRCSE is intended for global use, and ABET, while international, is only one of several accrediting bodiesin the world for engineering program s. Nevertheless, the ABET definitions are useful. The ABETdefinitions of objectives and outcom es are consistent with the terminology used internationally and arebroadly similar to the language used in the discussion of curricula in m any fields. Also, as systems

3 The reference to ABET is used here to support the definition of objectives. However, as stated in Appendix A’s

Guiding Principles while GRCSE could inform accreditation, certification, or licensing, it is not intended to be useddirectly for any of these purposes.

engineering (SE) increases its m aturity as an engineering discipline, defining its curricular design in theterms used by other engineering disciplines will assist in the acceptance of SE. Consequently, ABETdefinitions and recomm endations are referenced in GRCSE. Program objectives are inform ed by m ultiple sources, such as em ployers of engineers, com petency m odels provided by these organizations, educator-distributed survey results, etc. Organizations that hireengineers analyze their engineering workforce requirem ents and docum ent the results, in part, incom petency m odels (see Appendix F) that define what accom plishments are expected from theirengineers three to five years after graduation (this applies to graduates of both bachelor’s and m aster’slevel programs). In turn, these organizations, individually or collectively, m ay provide their com petency m odels to educational organizations that m ay then use them wholly or in part to develop programobjectives. This m ay be a form alized process, with custom er organizations recognizing or even directlysponsoring program s against agreed objectives. Alternately, a m ore m arket-led approach m ay haveeducators using surveys or other means to identify program objectives that will attract potentialstudents. M ost program s have at least an inform al sense of the needs of the potential high-volum e em ployers of their graduates. Few program s have form ally specified these objectives, however, and GRCSE explicitly seeks to increase this practice. The design of curricula is prim arily predicated on achieving the program objectives. Consequently, theprogram outcomes selected should directly support the matriculated engineer in achieving the programobjectives. The program outcom es subsequently drive the course selection for the curriculum and thelearning objectives for each course (see Figure 3 above). Program objectives and program outcom es are crucial statements about curricula. Accordingly, the GRCSE team conducted a global survey of graduate SE program s (see Appendix B) to collect theseprogram s’ objectives and outcom es. The results of the surveys were used to shape the suggestedobjectives and outcomes in Chapters 2 and 3. Objectives are one way to distinguish program s from one another. For exam ple, in a program that maytypically place graduates into the aerospace industry, the set of objectives would address the workforceneeds of the aerospace industry and the associated outcom es would describe how the programprepared graduates for that objective. Another program may provide system engineers to thecom m unications industry, and its objectives and outcom es would reflect the workforce needs of thatindustry. Program s that service the government acquirer would have at least som e different objectivesthan those program s that service the governm ent supplier.

- **2.2 Setting Objectives**

A large, m ature engineering organization often has a form al workforce developm ent m odel. These m odels vary by organization and product line, but have comm on features. For exam ple, form al m odelsare designed to assure that the engineering workforce develops the proper set of com petencies tosupport the organization (see Appendix F). Com petency m odels specify the required KSAAs desired of the various classes of em ployees at differentstages in their careers. These KSAAs are often listed in position descriptions. Organizations useundergraduate education, graduate education, in-house training, external training, and work assignm ent

policies to provide the means for em ployees to obtain the required level of proficiency in specified KSAAs. W orkforce developm ent plans use the com petency m odels to m ap the desired KSAAs against the m eans used by the em ployees to obtain them . Em ployees are often certified, either internally or externally, or licensed. In particular, the International Council on System s Engineering (INCOSE) has a certification program for system s engineers. Certification or licensing serves as a designation that the engineers possess KSAAs to perform certainduties in the organization. If a program intends to channel students into a certification or licensureregim en, then appropriate educational requirements should be incorporated into the objectives. Licensure m ay have other requirements besides education and it is worth m entioning that these otherrequirements, such as experience or peer review, m ay be beyond the scope of the educational program. However, it is useful for the designers of an educational program to be cognizant of these otherrequirements so that the educational program will provide the student with the foundation, to theextent feasible, to achieve the other requirem ents. In this case, an organization com m unicates withinternal or external educators and trainers to define what current or potential em ployees of theirorganization need to learn. Accreditation agencies have their own specialized language, and those term s (objectives and outcom es)are often used to comm unicate with educational institutions. Educational institutions establishindustrial advisory boards (IABs), or similarly nam ed entities, for their stakeholders to influence thedesign of their program s. As an exam ple, ABET requires that the needs of the educational institution’sconstituencies be addressed in its program objectives; the use of these advisory boards is a com m on m ethod for constituencies to provide input relative to their needs. In m ost of the United States (US) oneof the prerequisites for a professional engineer’s license is com pletion of an ABET-accreditedengineering program (The Professional Engineer 2011). In the United Kingdom (UK), registration as a chartered engineer usually requires com pletion of an accredited degree at either the bachelor’s or m aster’s level (Engineering Council 2011). Universities com m unicate with their stakeholders, usuallythrough these advisory boards, and consider their input carefully when form ally defining programobjectives. However, the objectives, like the outcomes, are set by the faculty. All of these – com petency m odels, certification regim es, licensure, accreditation, advisory boards – influence the design of program objectives.

- **2.3 Exam ple Objectives**

To illustrate the im plementation of objectives for a program , three exam ples are provided: two from theprogram s in the US and one from a program in France. As other graduate institutions define objectives,future versions of GRCSE will expand the set of exem plars. The US program exam ples com e from a survey of graduate program s (Appendix B) that discovered onlytwo instances of SE program s in the US that had form al program objectives. Both US program s weresubject to ABET accreditation at the graduate level, which requires the publication of objectives, andboth US schools serve the US defense enterprise. Since ABET only accredits an educational institution’slowest degree-granting engineering program , and these schools granted only m aster's and doctoraldegrees, they provide a unique reference point for objectives for a SE m aster’s degree.

The objectives of the first school are listed below:

 Graduates will rise to positions of technical and/or program m atic leadership withincapability planning, system acquisition, and/or sustainm ent organizations. Exam ples ofleadership positions include technical director, division chief, chief engineer, and systemprogram m anager or director.

 Graduates will em ploy SE m ethods and tools across the Departm ent of Defense (DoD)acquisition life cycle. Exam ples of SE m ethods and tools include decision analysis, tradestudies, risk m anagem ent, requirem ents m anagem ent, architecture definition orevaluation, and capability assessm ent.

The objectives of the second school are:

 Leadership – Students will be provided with an educational foundation that prepares themfor leadership roles along diverse career paths.

 Program M anagem ent – Students will be provided with an educational foundation thatprepares them for assignm ents related to research, design, developm ent, procurem ent,integration, m aintenance, and life cycle m anagem ent of system s for defense and nationalsecurity.

 Operational Utilization – Students will be provided with an educational foundation thatallows them to understand the capabilities and lim itations of m ilitary SE and to effectivelyem ploy SE in diverse m ilitary settings.

Both of these US programs are specialized in the sense that they serve the US defense enterprise andthat their objectives are not immediately transferable to other program s. However, they do serve toillustrate that objectives are "broad statem ents that describe the career and professionalaccom plishments that the program is preparing the graduates to achieve" (ABET Engineering Accreditation Comm ission 2010, 2). From these objectives flow the specific program outcomes of theseschools. The third and final exam ple of program objectives com es from a university in France. The followingexam ple is translated from the original French by one of the GRCSE authors:

 The aim of the m aster’s program is to propose an initial training for future systemarchitects and project leaders in the field of specification, design, deploym ent, and m aintenance of com plex Air Traffic M anagem ent system s. At the end of their training,students should be able to take up the m ain challenges of these system s, such as safety,efficiency, delay, cost, and environm ental im pact.

 (This university) educates both future non-governm ental and governm ental engineers.

o Non-governm ental engineers are destined for a career within com panies inaeronautics (e.g., European Aeronautical Defence and Space (EADS), Airbus, and Air France), in electronics (e.g., Thales, Rockwell Collins, etc.), in software engineering (e.g., IBM , Steria, etc.), in space (e.g., Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES),

Astrium , etc.), and in m any other dom ains. W hen they are working for thesecom panies, engineers will be able to hold the following positions: developm entengineer (with the objective to participate on the developm ent of new system s), engineering consultant (with the objective to be able to m ake links betweenresearch advances and practical industrial application), and/or project leader (withthe objective to be able to harm onize the technical, financial, and com m ercialaspects necessary for the success of industrial projects).

o Governm ental engineers will be em ployed by Direction Generale de l’Aviation Civile (DGAC), which is a French Civil Aviation Authority, in its various departm ents,holding sim ilar positions (e.g., engineering, operation, research, teaching, and m anagem ent).

- **2.4 Generic Objectives**

GRCSE proposes a generic set of program objectives. The objectives are offered as a starting point thatshould be tailored by each institution to reflect their vision for graduates informed by each institution’sstakeholders. The objectives aim at the time fram e of three to five years after graduation, thusparalleling the ABET approach. The three to five year tim e fram e is short enough to be practical for usein program m aintenance and to avoid the influence of non-program factors in graduate progression, butalso long enough for graduates to build the foundational experience of their careers. Three to five years after graduation, program graduates are expect to be able to:

1. Effectively analyze, design, or im plem ent feasible, suitable, effective, supportable, affordable,

and integrated system solutions to system s of products, services, enterprises, and system ofsystem s, throughout the entire life cycle or a specified portion of the life cycle. This could betailored by explicitly stating the types of system s that graduates develop and a given dom ain (e.g., aerospace).

2. Successfully assum e a variety of roles in m ulti-disciplinary team s of diverse m em bership,

including technical expert and leadership at various levels.

3. Dem onstrate professionalism and grow professionally through continued learning and

involvem ent in professional activities. Contribute to the growth of the profession. Contribute tosociety through ethical and responsible behavior.

4. Com m unicate (read, write, speak, listen, and illustrate) effectively in oral, written, and newly

developing m odes and media, especially with stakeholders and colleagues.

These generic objectives were developed to describe what a graduate would be likely to accom plish inthe near to mid-term in their career (see expectation 1 above) and to parallel those found in otherengineering disciplines (see expectations 2, 3, and 4 above). Schools should tailor the objectives to theirown program stakeholders. Sheard (1996, 2000) describes twelve roles for systems engineers. A program and its stakeholders mightselect some of those roles explicitly when tailoring the second generic objective.

Academic institutions and em ployers might also consider intentional collaboration in both near-termcross-sectional studies, and longer-term longitudinal studies to investigate the effectiveness andusefulness of the SE education objectives. These studies could be done in cooperation with events suchas the Conference on System s Engineering Research (CSER) or with the university's engineeringeducation and system s engineering faculty stakeholders. Em ployers of the program ’s graduates provide the context for the objectives of a given institution. Theyalso provide feedback, as requested by the institution during the assessment of its program objectives,in regard to how well students were prepared to m eet the program ’s objectives. The feedback is used toadjust program objectives, outcom es, and content.

Suitable measures of these objectives could include: successful com pletion of professional registration,certification, or licensure that is in accordance with national standards, participation in a professionalsociety, appropriate job progression, and supervisor feedback. In particular, becom ing an INCOSE Certified SE Professional (CSEP) would be evidence of m eeting several of the objectives.
