## 3. Expected Outcom es W hen a Student Graduates

Outcom es describe what students are expected to know and be able to do by the tim e of graduation. These relate to the skills, knowledge, and behaviors that students acquire as they progress through theprogram . Chapter 2 described the process for setting objectives. Building on that process, this chapter describesexpected outcom es for program s aligned with the GRCSE recomm endations. In addition, this chapterpresents the relationships between the program outcom es and objectives, and how these outcomessupport the achievem ents of the program objectives three to five years after graduation. Appendix D represents a m apping between the program outcomes and the content of Core Body of Knowledge (CorBoK), and how the CorBoK content facilitates the attainm ent of the program outcom es.

- **3.1 GRCSE Expected Outcom es**

The expected outcom es describe what students are expected to know and be able to do by the tim e ofgraduation to com m ence or enhance professional practice as a system s engineer. They include a mix oftechnical and professional capabilities that reflects the diverse skills that successful system s engineersrequire. Development of the outcom es was supported in part by the survey of graduate program s conducted in 2010 (see Appendix B for additional inform ation). The outcom es in this chapter are starting points from which a university should define its own set. Som e outcom es, in particular outcom es related to the FOUNDATION, CONCENTRATION, and TOPIC DEPTH, recomm end m astery at certain levels of Bloom's taxonom y (described in Appendix C). Thesecan be associated with specific, m easurable KSAAs, which are very useful for assessm ent. Associatingsimilar measures with the m ore qualitative outcom es is m ore difficult. W here appropriate, somepossible approaches for these are included. GRCSE asserts that certain knowledge areas and topics in the Guide to the System s Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) need to be covered in a graduate curriculum (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015). Thesetopics are called the core body of knowledge, or CorBoK. The Foundation and Concentration outcomesspecifically describe the level of mastery expected for the CorBoK, which is discussed in detail in Chapter

6. It is im portant to note that in standard curriculum developm ent practice, the outcom es are derivedfrom the objectives. As an exam ple, the GRCSE team has provided a m apping between the expectedoutcom es and the sam ple objectives found in Chapter 2; this mapping can be found in Table 3, which islocated at the conclusion of this chapter.

- **3.2 GRCSE Expected Outcom es**

GRCSE program outcom es are divided to four m ajor categories:

 SE Concepts,  SE Role,

 SE Practice, and  SE Professionalism .

Each category has three or four outcom es; the order does not im ply a ranking. GRCSE presents the setof outcom es with the view that they all interact to form a coherent view of a program. Upon graduation, students who attend a m aster’s program in SE that follows the GRCSErecomm endations are expected to satisfy all of the outcom es. These outcom es are described below (please note that the order indicates the order in which outcom es are discussed and does not im ply rankor im portance):

 FOUNDATION (SE Concepts)  CONCENTRATION (SE Concepts)  TOPIC DEPTH (SE Concepts)  APPLICATION DOM AIN (SE Role)  SPECIALTY (SE Role)  RELATED DISCIPLINES (SE Role)  SOFTW ARE IN SYSTEMS (SE Role)  REQUIREMENT RECONCILIATION (SE Practice)  PROBLEM/SOLUTION EVALUATION (SE Practice)  REALISM (SE Practice)  PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT (SE Professionalism )  TEAMW ORK (SE Professionalism )  ETHICS (SE Professionalism) These are described in detail in the following sections. As these outcom es are referenced throughout GRCSE, they are listed by their abbreviated nam e and form atted as shown above (e.g. “the FOUNDATIONoutcom e”). Note that for each outcom e above the category to which it belongs is listed in parentheses.

- ***3.2.1 System s Engineering Concepts***

This group of outcom es provides the necessary breadth and depth of the knowledge required for all SEgraduates to becom e contributing m em bers of the profession. The SE Concepts category includes: *FOUNDATION, CONCENTRATION, and TOPIC DEPTH.*

 FOUNDATION – Achieve the designated Bloom's levels of attainm ent for each topic containedwithin *the CorBoK foundation.* The CorBoK foundation specifies the topics that all students should learn in a professional SE m aster’s program and includes a minim um Bloom’s level for each topic included (please see

Chapter 6 for additional detail). It is a basic principle of GRCSE that all successful SE graduatestudents will have reached these levels of achievement. M astering the foundation requires learning principles exem plified through practice. A graduating student will have dem onstrated the ability to perform at the specified Bloom ’s level,which ranges from knowledge (the lowest level) to analysis (the fourth level of the taxonomy). GRCSE does not state how the dem onstration of achievement at the defined Bloom ’s level willbe performed. Each individual program m ust decide how to im plement the recom mendationthrough its curriculum design and assessm ent processes. Appendix E offers som e generalguidance on the kinds of specific learning outcom es and associated assessm ent approaches that m ay be used to assess student achievem ent. Chapter 8 provides actual exam ples of outcom esand objectives developed as part of the assessm ent process.

 CONCENTRATION – Achieve designated Bloom's levels of attainment for each topic containedwithin *one of the CorBoK concentrations, as appropriate for the type of master’s program or foran individual student’s interest.* GRCSE recognizes that there are different roles for systems engineers and these are reflected indifferent profiles of the core knowledge and skills. For exam ple, the knowledge and skills willdiffer between those who will use SE knowledge to m ake acquisition decisions and m anage SEteam s and those who will perform SE technical activities within a team. W hile all SE graduatesshould have m astered the FOUNDATION outcom e, they m ay need a different set of additionalskills for their SE specialization. Each CorBoK concentration specifies additional topics and/orincreased Bloom ’s levels for som e topics, which will apply to different types of m aster’sprogram s. Two concentrations are identified in version 1.0 of GRCSE: System s Engineering M anagem ent (SEM ) and System s Design and Developm ent (SDD). A program that follows GRCSE recomm endations will need to decide early in the curriculumdevelopment or update process which of the concentrations it intends to include. M astering a concentration requires learning principles dem onstrated through academic practice. Forguidance on the expected levels of attainm ent for the CorBoK concentrations, see Chapter 6.

 TOPIC DEPTH – Achieve a Bloom’s synthesis level of attainment for at least one topic from the *CorBoK (either foundation or concentration).* Synthesis, in Bloom ’s taxonom y, is the “ability to put parts together to form a new whole” (adapted from Bloom et al. 1956). This involves the use of existing ideas to create new ones,generalizing from facts, relating knowledge from several areas, prediction, and drawingconclusions. It m ay also involve the adaptation of “general” solution principles to theem bodiment of a specific problem. A student needs to delve deeply into at least one topic fromthe CorBoK (see Chapter 6); such depth strengthens the student‘s analytic skills and enables thestudent to solve difficult problem s in at least one area. The selection of a topic of deeper understanding may be standardized by the program to fit withits specific objectives in a particular dom ain or sector. Alternatively, the topic m ay be selected

by a student as an area of specialization that can be achieved through program electives,capstone design and/or projects. It is m ore likely that areas of depth will be taken from the CorBoK concentrations that are relevant to a program. However, the dem onstration ofsynthesis-level ability in any aspect of SE is an im portant outcom e in its own right, and willrem ain valid even if the student does not go on to practice in that aspect.

- ***3.2.2 System s Engineering Role***

System s engineers are required to participate as productive m em bers of interdisciplinary team s. Theyperform different tasks within different dom ains. The four outcomes in the SE Role category - *APPLICATION DOMAIN, SPECIALTY, RELATED DISCIPLINE, and SOFTW ARE IN SYSTEM S - provide thenecessary* background for graduates to perform effectively in these interdisciplinary environm ents.

 APPLICATION DOM AIN – Demonstrate the ability to perform SE activities in one application domain,such *as defense, aerospace, finance, medical, transportation, or telecommunications.* This outcome involves understanding how differences in a dom ain manifest them selves in both a system and the engineering of that system. This outcom e also includes the ability to learn a new application dom ain. It incorporates an understanding of specialized terminology,technology, methods, tools, and constraints that are unique to the chosen application dom ain. This outcom e does not require a student to become an expert in an application dom ain, anachievement that norm ally takes m any years of experience and education. However, SE onlybecom es tangible when practiced within the context of a dom ain, where it brings real value andwhere system s engineers face the characteristics and peculiarities of that dom ain on a dailybasis. Priorities, vocabulary, paradigm s, technologies, tools, and a myriad of other factors varyfrom dom ain to dom ain; SE graduate students should be exposed to the specifics from at leastone dom ain. As a reference curriculum , GRCSE gives each program the flexibility to em phasize its definingcharacteristics. Nevertheless, depth in an application dom ain requires knowing how to applyseveral of the relevant, significant tools and technologies. Therefore, it is stronglyrecomm ended that students be required to dem onstrate their capability to apply their SEknowledge in at least one dom ain through prior work experience, projects, and the capstoneexperience.

 SPECIALTY – Apply SE principles in order to address a specialty, such as: security, safety,affordability, *or safety-critical or embedded systems.* This outcom e includes understanding how differences in specialties m anifest them selves in bothengineering a system and in the function of the system itself. It also includes the need for anexamination of the skills that are required to learn a new application type or specialty. It is possible that a specialty m ay be closely associated with a particular application dom ain. Forexam ple, security and privacy are typically extrem ely im portant in financial transactions;however, for an autom obile braking system , safety is likely the m ost im portant property indeveloping a solution. Developm ent standards are of critical im portance in defense applications,

but less im portant in system s used to create special effects in m ovies. It should be noted thatthe specialty does not have to be linked to the m astery of an application domain. A program m ay choose to couple application dom ain and specialty or m ay allow students to select anapplication dom ain and specialty of interest, even if the specialty is not em phasized in a givendom ain. Coupling the two m ay provide students with the opportunity to delve into each m oredeeply; if the two are not coupled, students m ay have m ore difficulty allocating appropriatetim e to each.

 RELATED DISCIPLINES – Comprehend the relationships between SE and other disciplines, such asproject *management, human factors, and other engineering fields, as discussed in the SEBoK,and be able to articulate the value proposition of these disciplines for SE.* SE incorporates skill sets from m any disciplines; including traditional engineering disciplines (electrical, m echanical, civil, etc.) as well as m ore m anagem ent-focused disciplines (project m anagem ent, program m anagem ent, industrial engineering, etc.). It is im portant that system s engineers possess basic knowledge related to these disciplines and also understand how SE isrelated to other disciplines. A student should be able to articulate how SE could and shouldinteract with these disciplines and what com m on pitfalls m ay occur when these relationshipsare not properly m anaged. This is discussed in “Part 6: Related Disciplines” of the SEBoK (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015). Given the increasing complexity of m odern system s, it is im perative for graduates of SEprogram s to understand and appreciate the fundam ental concepts of project m anagement,their relationship with SE, and the ways in which com plexity can be m anaged in projects. Inaddition to the general relationships, som e disciplines, such as hum an factors, are now heavilyentwined with system s. Hum an factors deals with com plex system s that are generally operatedand/or used by hum ans; in these system s, issues associated with usability and ergonom ics play a m ajor role in system success or failure.

 SOFTW ARE IN SYSTEM S – Demonstrate an understanding and appreciation of the level of softwareengineering *necessary to develop current and future products, services, and enterprise systems.* An adequate understanding of software engineering (SwE) will fundamentally change the way a system s engineer conceives, architects, and im plem ents a system. For exam ple, in today’spremium autom obiles, software development accounts for 13-15% of the total developm entcost; safe and efficient operation of hybrid automobiles requires m any millions of lines ofsoftware working cooperatively in m any subsystems (Charette 2009). Failure to adequatelyunderstand software behavior is a leading cause of system failure (Charette 2005). Therefore, anunderstanding of SwE and the unique requirements, considerations, m ethods, practices,processes, and tools required for effective SwE m ay fundam entally change the way SE isperform ed. For exam ple, SwE understanding m ay open additional options for allocatingfunctionality throughout a system. Students do not need to become experts in SwE, but shouldunderstand the unique characteristics of software to better enable them to support thedevelopment of software-intensive system s.

- ***3.2.3 System s Engineering Practice***

There are num ber of phases, processes, activities, and m ethodologies involved in the development of a system from inception to disposal. The three outcom es in the SE Practice category provide thenecessary background for graduates to successfully develop a reliable system : REQUIREM ENT *RECONCILIATION, PROBLEM/SOLUTION EVALUATION, and REALISM.*

 REQUIREM ENT RECONCILIATION – M aster the quantitative skills to reconcile conflictingrequirements, *finding acceptable compromises within limitations of cost, time, knowledge, risk,existing systems, and organizations.* New requirem ents routinely em erge during the course of m ost large or com plex projects. Students should engage in realistic exercises that expose them to conflicting and changingrequirements. The graduate of a m aster’s program should be able to identify the im pacts ofsuch emergence on technical planning, system s architecture, and technical perform ance, am ongother considerations. For exam ple, students m ust be able to identify and elicit the real needs ofthe custom er rather than sim ply im plem ent a custom er’s proposed solution that m ay not fit thereal need. Once new requirem ents are identified, a range of appropriate techniques for presentingalternatives and m aking trades should be introduced as a m eans of resolving conflicts. Theresulting solution should be tailored to m eet these conflicting requirem ents while also following a project’s configuration m anagem ent policies and procedures. Students need to understandthe basic techniques available for resolving conflict within the broader SE context and havesom e experience applying these techniques. Please note that there is a relationship between this outcome and the ETHICS outcom e (“SE *Professionalism” below), as difficulties in reconciling conflicts within policy and legal guidelinescan* lead to ethical dilemmas.

 PROBLEM/SOLUTION EVALUATION – M aster the quantitative skills to evaluate alternative systemsolution *strategies, including how well different solutions relate to the identified problem, andexpress the relevant criteria to ensure solutions are selected against a holistic systemsperspective.* System solution approaches and relevant solution technologies are continuously evolving in a dynamic discipline like SE. A system s engineer m ust be able to perform tradeoff studies toidentify appropriate solution options, understand limitations and appropriate uses of solutionoptions, and help set solution assessm ent criteria which cover potential holistic system concerns. Students should be able to act as change agents within their respective professionalorganizations. System solution options m ay be driven by the selection of key technologies, including:innovative power supplies, lightweight m aterials, advanced com puting hardware, or softwareapproaches such as data fusion or artificial intelligence. Innovations m ay also com e from thereuse of existing technologies in a new application, or from new m anufacturing, testing, support,

or m arketing approaches. System solutions can also be characterized by the organization andrelationships between system com ponents. For instance, centralized vs. distributed control, orthe m anner in which a new system is integrated into and interacts with existing system s. An SE graduate should know how to decide the relative technical and non-technical m erits ofsolution options based on assem bled or discovered evidence and effectively advocate forappropriate system choices. Note, however, that in a university setting, a student will likely onlybe able to dem onstrate their potential to be an effective advocate. This outcom e has a strong relationship to the outcom e requiring dom ain experience (APPLICATION DOM AIN outcom e, above). The strengths and weaknesses of a system option aregenerally not absolute, but vary with the application dom ain and other contextual factors.

 REALISM – Comprehend and appreciate the challenges of applying SE to realistic problemsthroughout *the system life cycle.* GRCSE advises that as a minim um , students should be able to support relevant SE activitiesacross all aspects of a well-bounded project throughout the com plete product life cycle. Thegraduate should be knowledgeable of the overall systems approach at each life cycle stage andhave an understanding of all SE activities relevant to the life cycle. It is im portant that students be given sufficient opportunities to understand how activities atdifferent stages of the life cycle com e together to contribute to project success, as well as toexperience representative real-world issues, such as how to comm unicate with stakeholders andthe im pact of change on both technical and non-technical system issues. The presence of one or m ore capstone experience(s), com bined with group projects rather thanindividual activities, such as working on a thesis, is of considerable im portance for a student todevelop realistic experience. It offers students the opportunity to address a realistic problemand dem onstrate their ability to bring together topics from a variety of courses and apply themeffectively. This should also include the ability to offer reflections on their achievem ents. Universities will wish to tailor this outcome to the stated objectives of their program and theassociated professional roles they expect their students to take.

- ***3.2.4 System s Engineering Professionalism***

System s today are typically com plex, requiring system s engineers to serve as productive andprofessional mem bers of team s, using the m ost recent and appropriate technologies. There are threeoutcom es in this category that provide the necessary characteristics required for to be successfulthroughout their career: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPM ENT, TEAM W ORK, and ETHICS.

 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPM ENT – Be able to learn new models, techniques, and technologies as theyemerge, *and appreciate the necessity of such continuing professional development.* To be effective system s engineers, graduates m ust be able to grow both personally andprofessionally. In a field as dynamic as SE, lifelong learning is essential to continued success. It istherefore im perative for the graduate student to develop the necessary skills to keep abreast of

the latest developm ents and to be able to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of leadingedge concepts as they relate to the system under design. This includes the ability to evaluateand adapt system s developm ent processes, practices, metrics, and tools to incorporate newadvances, as well as the ability to create or assem ble satisfactory evidence for these actions. A m aster‘s program cannot instill the desire for lifelong learning, but it can teach the skills thatenable lifelong learning.

 TEAM W ORK – Perform as an effective member of a multi-disciplinary team, effectivelycommunicate *both orally and in writing, lead in one area of system development, such as projectmanagement, requirements analysis, architecture, construction, or quality assurance, anddisplay leadership capabilities within a team.* Students need to com plete tasks that involve work as an individual, but also m ust com plete m any other tasks that entail working with a group of individuals as well as internal and externalstakeholders. For group work, students should be inform ed of the nature of groups and of groupactivities, as well as their expected roles, as explicitly as possible. This m ust include an em phasison the im portance of such m atters as a disciplined approach, the need to adhere to deadlines,how to comm unicate both orally and in writing, and how teams are evaluated as a whole. Students should have an appreciation of team dynamics and leadership techniques and be ableto lead at least one aspect of the SE process. It is expected that upon graduation, a m aster’sprogram student will be able to take a significant role in one or m ore specific areas of SE. Thisrole can be either technical or m anagerial, depending upon the focus of the m aster’s program. Experiencing different team roles will help students to understand how they m ay m ove forwardprofessionally. Students will also benefit from experiencing the dynamic relationships betweenteam m em bers and from taking appropriate leadership roles to prepare them for potentialprofessional posts.

 ETHICS – Demonstrate knowledge of professional ethics and the application of professional ethicsin *decision-making and SE practice.* Professionals routinely face ethical, legal, and social dilemm as; for exam ple, when is it ethically,legally, and socially acceptable to com prom ise quality in order to m eet schedule? W hat types ofactivities constitute a professional conflict of interest or a breach of ethics, law, or social norms? Potential violations of the law are clear, but in m ost situations, there are no black and whiterules for resolving such questions. Professional societies publish ethical codes of practice andgraduates should be familiar with and be able to apply the relevant codes. An SE graduate should have the m aturity, knowledge, and judgm ent to m ake comm onprofessional decisions and take appropriate actions to respond to situations that have ethical,legal, and social im plications. Note, however, that in a university setting, a student will typicallyonly be able to dem onstrate their potential to m ake appropriate ethical decisions.

- **3.3 Alignm ent betw een Outcom es and Objectives**

It is expected that students of an SE program would be able to dem onstrate the above capabilities upongraduation. Chapter 2 presented a set of exam ple objectives for a program , which students should be

able to dem onstrate three to five years after graduation. The achievement of objectives is dependentupon achievement of the outcom es, life-long learning, and three to five years of on-the-job experienceand training. Therefore, it is necessary for the outcom es to support the achievement of the objectives. Table 3 shows the relationship between the recommended outcomes and sam ple objectives provided in Chapter 2; this is intended only as an exam ple of how such an alignm ent exercise could be conductedduring curriculum developm ent. The alignm ent between outcomes and objectives is classified as either:

 Strong – There is clear correlation between achievem ent of an outcom e and achievem entof an objective; if the outcom e is not reached by graduation there is a high probability thatthe corresponding objective m ay not be achieved within three to five years.

 W eak – There is m arginal correlation between the outcom e and the specific objective.
