## Program

For any graduate program , the prior accom plishm ents of entering students are critical to success. Thischapter elaborates the knowledge, experience, and undergraduate degrees the GRCSE authors deemnecessary for students entering m aster’s program s in SE. Attainment of program outcom es and objectives depends in part on student capabilities when theyenter the program. For exam ple, m any topics in the CorBoK require a grasp of probability and statistics,such as risk m anagem ent, safety engineering, and system verification and validation. A student entering a m aster’s program with little or no understanding of probability and statistics is at a distinctdisadvantage in classes which include these topics. Nevertheless, a program m ay for their own reasonsopt to establish entrance requirements that are inconsistent with GRCSE recom m endations. Like theother aspects of GRCSE, the entrance expectations are recomm endations. Accordingly, a university m aychoose to im plement a program with different entrance expectations than are recomm ended in GRCSE. If the entrance expectations have gaps with respect to the recomm ended entrance expectations, it maybe necessary for the program to include additional subject m atter in order to achieve the outcom esdescribed in Chapter 3. If the actual entrance requirem ents of a program go beyond the recomm endedbackground described in GRCSE the additional capability of the students at entry will permitachievement of m ore am bitious outcom es than are described in GRCSE.

- **4.1 Findings from the Survey of Existing Program s**

A survey of 33 SE master’s program s is summ arized and analyzed in Appendix B. The survey wasinternational in scope, with data reported from ten counties: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Cyprus, Finland, France, Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, and the United States. Although there was great variation in theadmission requirem ents of the program s, the following general com m onalities were observed:

 Alm ost all program s require an undergraduate degree in engineering, natural science,com puting, or m athem atics.

 M ost require a grade point average of at least 3.0 (the equivalent of a “B” average) inundergraduate perform ance.

 Few program s require special exam perform ance as a prerequisite for entry (e.g., the Graduate Record Exam (GRE) in the US or the National Exam for Com puting Graduation Entrance POSCOM P in Brazil). Som e apply their own exam results for student selection.

 About one-third of the program s require between two and five years of experience. Othersrequire significant project work as part of the course of study.

 M ost program s require a language proficiency exam for non-native speakers (e.g., in the U.S., the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) and International English Language Testing System (IELTS) are com m on; in Brazil, proficiency certificates in English and Portuguese are typically required).

These types of entry criteria are not unusual am ong graduate-level program s in general.

- **4.2 GRCSE Entrance Expectations**

To have a strong probability of achieving all recomm ended GRCSE outcomes at graduation andeventually achieving program objectives, GRCSE recomm ends that an entering student satisfy each ofthree overarching entrance expectations: degree, experience, and language. These expectations aredetailed in the rem ainder of this section. Outcom es are described in Chapter 3, and objectives aredescribed in Chapter 2.

1. The equivalent of an undergraduate degree in engineering, the natural sciences4 , mathematics,

*or computer science.* GRCSE Preparatory Knowledge (Table 4, below) defines the expected knowledge that would beobtained through the undergraduate or other educational preparation and provides thebaseline knowledge expected of students entering a m aster’s program for SE. It is adapted from Table 1 in Chapter 6.2 of GSwE2009 (Pyster (ed.) 2009). The Bloom’s levels specified areexplained in Appendix C. M any existing SE master’s program s expect students to have a bachelor’s degree in anengineering or scientific field. Such students bring key dom ain knowledge, significant m athem atical skills, and the ability to think analytically, all of which are essential to SE. In order to study graduate SE topics, students m ust possess basic knowledge and skills in m athem atics, science, engineering fundamentals, com puting, and general education. This isessential for students in both technically oriented and m anagement oriented m aster’s program s in order to learn technical topics effectively. Those managing SE projects (either as developersor acquirers) m ust be able to interact effectively with a broad spectrum of systems engineers,other discipline engineers, and other professionals and be capable of understanding, supporting,and evaluating SE activities. Program s accepting students lacking the background in Table 4 should either provideopportunities for them to obtain that background (e.g., offering leveling courses) or considerreducing the scope and degree of achievement of the program outcomes (as described in Chapter 3). Conversely, students with extensive experience in an engineering field m ay haveacquired knowledge and capability in topics listed in Table 4. A student m ay also have earned a bachelor’s (undergraduate) degree in SE. Accordingly, thereare several possible approaches for students with an undergraduate degree in SE who wish topursue a graduate degree in SE. Am ong them are the following:  A program m ay waive the basic or introductory SE courses, allowing students to explore m ore advanced topics or delve m ore deeply into an area of specialization, and  A student with a systems-centric undergraduate degree could enter a dom ain-centricprogram , with greater emphasis on dom ain-specific learning than general SE learning (e.g.,space SE, missile SE, etc.).

4 The natural sciences include biology, chem istry, physics, astronom y, and earth sciences.
