## General Education

- **1. Oral and W ritten Com m unication** Study and application of com m unication techniques that support developm ent and Applicationenhancem ent of oral and written com m unication skills.

- **2. Ethics and Professional Conduct** Principles related to the behavior and decision-m aking of professionals; obligations of Com prehensionprofessionals to clients and to society; codes of ethics; and social, legal, and historical issues. *The Bloom ’s Level definitions are discussed in Appendix C.

2. At least two years of practical experience in some aspect of SE. This experience should include

*participation in teams and involvement in the life cycle of a system, subsystem, or systemcomponent.* SE is an engineering field pertaining to the developm ent, delivery, m aintenance, and evolutionof products, services, and enterprises. SE involves the application of concepts, principles, andtechniques to the solutions of engineering problem s; such application can be best learned whencoupled with actual experience that supports the understanding and appreciation of how theseproblems are solved. Effective engineering requires learning through experience. The richness of the discussions in a graduate class and the sophistication of the analysis thatstudents can perform are driven, in part, by the experience of those students. W hile there areno known rigorous studies that prove this, the GRCSE authors believe that students with at leasttwo years of practical experience in system life cycle activities have a significantly deeperappreciation of the issues that are addressed in the master’s program. Two years is a low minim um requirem ent, and to fully appreciate system s engineering, a broadexperience of five or m ore years is recomm ended for even better prepared students and toenable m ore fulfilling education for them. Qualifying SE functional areas of experience m ay include:

 Requirements Engineering,  Risk and Opportunity M anagem ent,  Baseline Control,  Technical Planning,  Technical Effort Assessm ent,  Architecture/Design Developm ent,  Qualification, Verification, and Validation,  Process Definition,  Tool Support,  Training,  System s Integration,  Quality Assurance,  Specialty Engineering, and  Other.

See (INCOSE 2011) and the SEBoK (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015) for further descriptions ofrecognized SE activities.

3. Demonstrated ability to effectively communicate technical information, both orally and in

*writing, in a program’s language of instruction.* Language is the prim ary tool for delivering education. By its very nature, SE dem ands thatstudents have a sound comm and of the language of instruction. Because SE is a discipline thattouches and interacts with so m any other disciplines, it is critical to the success of a systemsengineer that he or she be able to comm unicate technical inform ation effectively. It is appropriate for universities to ensure that students entering the program have suitabletechnical language com petence to successfully complete the program . This entails using a process to verify that all entering students can write com petently and speak effectively in thelanguage of instruction. Verification m ethods include students submitting writing sam ples, beinginterviewed by faculty as part of the admissions process, or taking an exam , such as the GRE inthe US. This applies equally to native and non-native speakers.

It is appropriate for universities to consider requiring a certain standard of academic achievem ent inprior study, or a dem onstration of suitability by som e other method, such as through an entranceexamination or portfolio of work. The university m ay be m otivated by regulatory requirem ents or someaspects of its own policies. The method of dem onstration of ability and the particular standard selectedfor the threshold of “acceptable” should be carefully considered to ensure that each is appropriate forselecting students with a high probability of success in the program , without being unnecessarilyexclusionary. The expectations recom mended here are not admission requirem ents, which are set by individualuniversities and program s. The curriculum architecture, described in Chapter 5, Figure 4 provides a structure by which a university could address students who do not m eet the entry expectations.
