## Figure 6. CorBoK Organization. (GRCSE Original)

- **6.2 CorBoK Organization**

The CorBoK is structured in two parts: foundation knowledge and concentration knowledge. Foundationknowledge is com posed of the broad set of topics deemed essential for all system s engineers. Eachstudent is also expected to choose and acquire in-depth knowledge in an area of concentration. Theconcentration knowledge builds on the foundation knowledge by revisiting foundation topics thatshould be learned in m ore depth, as well as by adding topics. GRCSE includes two concentrations: System s Engineering M anagem ent (SEM ) and System s Design and Development (SDD). A program mightchoose from a wide array of concentrations; however, the following have been suggested: System Architecture, Verification & Validation, System Integration, System Evolution, In-Service SE, and M odeling & Sim ulation. The SEM and SDD concentrations are intended to illustrate this approach. Notethat all SEM and SDD topics com e from the SEBoK. Additional topics could be added for theconcentrations as part of the 50% that goes beyond that specified in the CorBoK tables in this Chapter.

Tables 4 through 8 identify the foundation and concentration topics for SEBoK Parts 2 through 6 (BKCASE Editorial Board, 2015), recom mending a Bloom ’s level of m astery for each, that togetheraddress the knowledge, skills, and abilities a student should possess to graduate with a m aster’s degreein SE. In som e cases, a Bloom ’s level is specified for a group of topics (e.g., all of the System s Fundam entals topics in Table 4 are specified at the Com prehension level). If a concentration has a higher Bloom level than the foundation, that level is shown in the table; otherwise, the table cell is blank. Appendix C explains Bloom levels in m ore detail, but fundamentally, they are a “depth of knowledge” m etric: an ordered arrangem ent from “knowledge” (some acquaintance with the topic), to “com prehension” (an ability to discuss or explain a topic), to “application” (be able to use knowledge inthe topic to solve a problem ), to “analysis” (a deeper analytical understanding of the m eaning of thetopic, how it is organized and its im portance). These levels are typically used by educators to set thelevel of attainm ent of educational or learning outcom es associated with an education unit or m odule. The CorBoK knowledge areas and topics (and the underlying SEBoK articles) support the learningoutcom es since they represent the content in an SE curriculum , unit, or m odule. The CorBoK Bloom level specification is a subjective judgm ent by educators and systems engineeringprofessionals of the appropriate level to be achieved by all m aster’s students. The GRCSE team arrivedat the Bloom’s levels through study, discussion, negotiation, specification, review, and revision. The Bloom specification should be viewed as general guidance, not as a precise or specific recommendationabout how to structure and allocate the knowledge elem ents into a curriculum . Since the Bloom’srecomm endations apply to a KA, program s m ay have higher or lower Bloom levels for individual topicsin the KA. Also, program s m ay offer greater depth as part of their tailoring. The reader will notice significant difference in the Bloom ’s levels assigned to the topics across thevarious SEBoK parts. Topics in Parts 2, 5, and 6 are prim arily listed at the Knowledge and Com prehensionlevels, while for Part 3 the Application or Analysis levels are used for m any topics. The reason for this isrelated to the nature of the parts:

 Part 2 topics are prim arily conceptual, with the concepts supporting the topics in Part 3.  Part 3 concentrates on the processes, methods, and practices used to m anage, develop, operateand m aintain systems.

 Parts 4, 5 and 6 contain topics that explore special categories of system s engineering, im portantengineering support and enabling features, and background on related disciplines. Oneexception is the Enabling Team s topic in Part 5; it is felt that all system s engineers need Application capability for this topic.
